---
layout: post
title:  "Room Simulation & Reverberation Approaches for Spatialized Audio"
date:   2025-05-25
categories:
---

# Done With Grad School, so here's a paper.
I am done with grad school. Thesis defense was Thursday, and I just submitted my last research paper. 
I thought it was decent and it might present some good information so I'm putting it here. 

  ## Room Simulation and Artificial Reverberation approaches within the context of Spatialized Audio Applications.

Artificial Reverberation has been available for over 50 years at this point, with the advent
of techniques for generation of artificial reverb and room simulation via computational methods
being introduced by Schroeder in 1961 via comb filtering and allpass filters. Reverberation refers
to the persistence of sound after the direct sound from a source has stopped. Sound generally
arrives to a listener in stages and, while in an enclosed environment provides listeners with a
characterization of a space which plays a major part in room acoustics; a direct sound arrives at a
listener at T0 and early reflections will follow from nearby surfaces to said direct sound. While
both of these can provide cues for sound localization it is important to note that early reflections
primarily convey information about the materials present in the space as well with an
accumulation of later reflections presenting a listener with a tail that is indicative of the size of
the space (Valimaki et al., 2012) RT60: the time it takes for a reverberant sound to decrease by
60 decibels after the original sound has stopped, as introduced by W.C Sabine.
Although previously, physical models of acoustic environments had been utilized as a
tool for the design of acoustical environments and physical spaces used to artificially apply
3
reverberation to signals in the 1920s their construction and need for physical space limited their
use; later on computational methods proved to be a more efficient method.
For auralization needs, approaches to artificial reverberation can be broken down into
three main methodologies:
1. Delay Networks
2. Convolutional
3. Acoustical computation/ geometrical acoustics.
In this paper we will focus on Delay Networs and Convolutional Techniques.

*Delay Networks and Schroeder:*

Artificial Reverberation using Delay Networks was first introduced in 1960 and utilized a series
of allpass filters in combination with comb filters to produce a series of delays, spectral content
and decay characteristics in order to approximate the diffuse nature of reverberation in a room,
and is a foundational approach to artificial reverb (Schroeder & Logan, 1961). When early
reflections are concerned Schroeder achieved these via parallel comb filters that introduce a
series of delays at fixed intervals, each comb filter reinforces specific frequencies, creating
resonant peaks in the response; by using multiple comb filters with slightly different delays, the
response is smoothed and the resonances are spread out, avoiding “significant” coloration. Delay
lengths in the comb are chosen specifically to be non-multiples of each other to avoid periodicity
in the comb filter outputs, while gain parameters primarily affect the decay time of the reverb
tail. The output of the parallel comb filters section is then processed through a series of all-pass
filters to increase the echo density and smooth out the tail.
Still, this approach has some limitations. 

Firstly, it is not physically accurate and relies
primarily on a perceptual approach. Secondly, the “comb filter stage” of this design may
introduce some unwanted coloration if not enough care is put into the implementation, and lastly
it does not model directional sound propagation. In any case, this is a powerful approach that
remains efficient, with Schroeder’s later work introducing an implementation with a more
simplified FIR filter and Moore (1979) expanding on this to introduce a simple first-order
low-pass filter within the feedback loop in the comb filter stage of the design to simulate air
absorption.

*Feedback Delay Networks and Binaural Applications:*

The use of impulse response-convolution methods can be a good approach for exact
simulation if the acoustical properties of a room, however for dynamic applications
parameterized simulation can provide increased flexibility for this context. Multichannel
Feedback Delay methods have been introduced for the efficient and dynamic auralization of
virtual rooms within the context of Binaural applications. Changing a FDN base stereo
reverberation implementation involves inserting a binaural decoder within the path of the
architecture where the direction of the direct sound and respective early reflections can be
simulated using Head Related Transfer Functions (Jot et al., 2025; Menzer, 2010).

FDN methods usually employ only a single network to simulate both early reflections
and reverberation. However, these single delay line methods have been shown to be somewhat
inaccurate when compared to a captured room impulse response, hence a parallel-delay-network
based methodology was introduced. This methodology allows one to “produce good ambient
reverb from the beginning of the impulse response and to use the other to produce distinct early
reflections at the precise instants when they should occur according to the image source model”
(Menzer, 2010, p. 2). 

According to Stautner and Puckette (1982) each channel of a FDN can be
seen as the corresponding barrier where sound is reflected (i.e: the number of walls in a room; 
when ceiling and floor are not considered), although they are perceptually relevant (the Menzer
model can be expanded to include them by adding additional channels in a similar manner to the
2 dimensional case). When a sound source is considered, the position of reverberant signals
stemming from the image source model correspond to the output of the reverberator channel,
which is thus then convolved with the HRTF that is appropriate for the position given; frequency
dependent dampening can be implemented as well using filters inside the loop. (Menzer, 2010).

*A Note on Geometrical Acoustics*'

Physically based approaches aim to approximate solutions for the wave equation, since
solving the wave equation for audible ranges in large spaces is computationally intensive. The
accuracy of these approximations heavily depends on the proposed application, for instance
reverberation that is perceptually approximate might be sufficient for certain applications while
some other tasks like architectural acoustics demand a higher level of accuracy. Additionally,
some of these approaches can work for real time applications, while others generate an impulse
response that are later used for convolution based reverb (Valimaki et al., 2012). Various
approaches have been suggested in order to generate Binaural Room Impulses with a lighter
computational load (Wendt, van de Par and Ewert, 2014). However, the focus here is not on
geometrical acoustics.

*Impulse Response Methods:*

Impulse responses in tandem with convolution have been a tested approach to room simulation,
where the implementation of convolutional reverb is equivalent to the large FIR filtering of a
signal, with zero delay convolutional approaches being currently widely used (Gardner, 1995),
especially considering fast convolution based implementations where the convolution is
performed in the frequency domain FFT methods in order to speed up computation. In short,
measuring an impulse response via playing a broadband noise impulse, using a clapper, or if
desired a sine sweep for greater accuracy in the capture (sine sweeps being the standard
methodology for measured impulses) where the measured signal is then convolved with the
reversed signal used during measurement to obtain the impulse response. Convolving a signal
with the resulting impulse response will result in the output of the system that the impulse
response represents.

*Using Binaural Room Impulse Responses:*

As seen above, a standard approach to simulating static binaural reverberation is by
utilizing Binaural Room Impulse Responses. A simulated reverberant sound can be produced by
convolution of the dry singal with the BRIR for both ears; BRIRs can be captured by Binaural
microphones such as the Neumman KU-100 head; this is the most straightforward approach
when Binaural Room Impulse Responses are concerned. When interactive movements are
needed, the convolutional filter is formed by interpolating the BRIRs of neighboring listening
points. However, some argue that there exist some limitations to capturing BRIRs (Wendt, van de
Par and Ewert, 2014). Several approaches to simulating IRs have been proposed, where it is
typical the an IIR can closely approximate a FIR filter with reduced computational cost, where
RIRs are divided into subbands and modelled separately.
Interesting techniques with a hybrid approach have also been employed by Wendt, van de
Par and Ewert (2014) in order to binaurally auralize a room where the early reflections are
generated utilizing the image source method under the assumption that the simulated
environment is a shoe-box room with low-order early reflections involved. The reverberant tail
of a room is perceptually simulated using Feedback Delay Network methods allowing specific
control of the reverberation characteristics. Spatialization in this case resembles the binaural
application of FDN reverb outlined above, where the output of delay lines is convolved with
corresponding number of spatially distributed HRTF locations; this system is suited for 6 degrees
of freedom and can result in mostly good subjective ratings.


*Closing Thoughts:*
While Artifcial Reverberation has been available for quite some time, ranging from
physical-analog methods to computationally efficient implementations for simulating complex
environments, it is clear that feedback delay networks remain foundational and offer good results
with low computational cost that are perceptually sound, regardless of limitations in physical
accuracy. By incorporating spatialization in FDN approaches trough the integration of Head
Related Transfer Functions.
Convolutional techniques can offer a more direct and accurate approach to simulated room
acoustics, wether recorded or simulated, particularly when Binaural Room Impulse Responses
are available for use. While their use might be limited in dynamic applications, advances in
hybrid techniques have provided more options and flexibility for this use case. The distinction
between these methods can reflect the trade offs between perceptual realism and physical
accuracy.


  ### References

Chowning, J. M. (1977). The Simulation of Moving Sound Sources. Computer Music Journal,
1(3), 48. https://doi.org/10.2307/3679609

Gardner, W. G. (1995). Efficient Convolution without Input/Output Delay. Journal of the Audio
Engineering Society, 43(3), 127–136.

Jot, J.-M., Warusfel, O. W., Mein, M., & Khale, E. (2025). Jean-Marc Jot, Olivier Warusfel,
Eckhard Kahle, Mireille Mein: Binaural Concert Hall Simulation in Real Time (IEEE 93,
Mohonk (USA) 1993). IRCAM Multimedia LibraryMédiathèque de l’Ircam © Ircam,
1996-2008 - Research Institute in Acoustics and MusicInstitut de Recherche et
Coordination Acoustique/Musique - Paris, France. Ircam.fr.
http://architexte.ircam.fr/textes/Jot93a/index.html

Menzer, F. (2010). Binaural Reverberation Using Two Parallel Feedback Delay Networks. AES,
2.

Moorer, J. A. (1979). About This Reverberation Business. Computer Music Journal, 3(2), 13.
https://doi.org/10.2307/3680280

Schroeder, M. R., & Logan, B. F. (1961). “Colorless” artificial reverberation. IRE Transactions
on Audio, AU-9(6), 209–214. https://doi.org/10.1109/tau.1961.1166351

Stautner, J., & Puckette, M. (1982). Designing Multi-Channel Reverberators. Computer Music
Journal, 6(1), 52. https://doi.org/10.2307/3680358

Valimaki, V ., Parker, J. D., Savioja, L., Smith, J. O., & Abel, J. S. (2012). Fifty Years of
Artificial Reverberation. IEEE Transactions on Audio, Speech, and Language
Processing, 20(5), 1421–1448. https://doi.org/10.1109/tasl.2012.2189567


Wendt, T., van de Par, S., & Ewert, S. (2014). A Computationally-Efficient and
Perceptually-Plausible Algorithm for Binaural Room Impulse Response Simulation.
Journal of the Audio Engineering Society, 62(11), 748–766.
https://doi.org/10.17743/jaes.2014.0042


